---
SEP: 2
Title: WIP Standardize Groups
Authors: Charles G. <charles@near.org>
Status: Draft
DiscussionsTo: https://github.com/nearsocial/SEPs/pull/2
Version: 1.0.0
Created: 2023-10-15
Last Updated: 2023-10-15
---


## Summary

This document serves to come to an agreement on a specification for a new "Groups" experience on Near Social, designed to allow people to create and discover communities around specific topics, interests, projects, governance, etc.

## Motivation

We need a SocialDB standard for groups to support discoverability on near.org and interoperability between gateways and dApps to mitigate the [compatibility problems](https://near.social/devgovgigs.near/widget/gigs-board.pages.Post?id=1034) which arise when dApps build distinct implementations of communities.


## UX Goals

1. To allow a group of users to moderate with sovernity a scope of socialDB limited to the members of the group. e.g. group members have read + write access to the group's socialDB namespace. 
1. Non-members only have read-only access to view group content
1. Group members should receive notifications for all relevant social interactions in a group (e.g. Like, Reply for Posts and Discussions)
1. All content posted to groups that a user is part of should appear the user’s "Following" activity feed. 
1. Leaving a group will stop content from appearing on a user’s feed.
1. Group content should only appear in the “All” activity feed if a group member reposts a group post to the main feed.
1. One should be able to retrieve a list of all groups in socialDB
1. One should be able to retrieve a list of all users in a group.
1. One should be able to search for groups, where search text is matched against the group's name and metadata.


## Rationale and Alternatives

A key success metric of this standard is to provide a minimal blueprint that gateways can build upon to ensure feature parity, in the UX goals above, across gateways. 

Prior art: 

1. near.social's NFT-based groups

The [group's post page](https://near.org/near/widget/ComponentDetailsPage?src=mob.near/widget/N.Group&tab=source); passing to this page an NFT's contractID as the groupId query param will [render the group details](https://near.org/mob.near/widget/N.Group?groupId=v0.8bityonce.near).   A primary drawback to this NFT-based approach is that there is no canonical list of group members. Instead, group membership is inferred from the owners of a NFT per a non-socialDB API - a Mintbase API is used in the above component. Depending on which API server is used to fetch the owners of a given NFT, this approach can lead to erroneous representations of who is a member of a group. For details, see this [Mintbase API Issue](https://github.com/Mintbase/mintbase-js/issues/412) and this [Enhanced API issue](https://github.com/near/near-enhanced-api-server/issues/70). 


1. devs.near's groups [defined implicitly by follow-style graph connections](https://near.org/devs.near/widget/every.group). 

A primary drawback to this graph-based approach is that there is no canonical source of group membership. A single group of N members can have M distinct versions of who belongs in that group, where M is the number of group members who decline to "mutually follow" each newly requested group member.  Group membership is managed by an object on the namespace of anyone who has requested access to a group, which contains a group identifer as a key with a value of a list of accountIds (AccountList). Even if no one approves someone's request to join a group, the requestor would retain a valid instance of that groupIdentifer:AccountList on their socialDB namespace - with their accountID included as a group member. This results in muliple versions of graphs which represent the definition of members of a group. For more details on this implementation see minute 33:45 [here](https://youtu.be/HAyweTF7IjU?si=z_hfct3oK_86nt_o)

With this approach, can we efficiently determine which group members should receive a notification when a post is created on that group's page?  How challenging would it be to ensure that only group members can post to this group's page? There is a solution here, however these implicitly defined group connections with multiple versions of group membership adds complexity. 


1. [Communities on DevHub](https://near.org/devgovgigs.near/widget/Ideas)

DevHub's community implementation exists on a distinct contract from near.social. This results in a lack of discoverability of DevHub's groups across gateways due to its community data not being included in the indexes which power search on socialdB.


## Specification 

1. Adjacent to root level socialDB accounts, create a new top account called `groups.near`. However, since this account name has already been claimed, I have slightly rearranged the same letters to use the spanish translation: `grupos.near`. For convience, gateway operators could add a redirect from `gatway.com/near/groups.near` -> `gatway.com/near/grupos.near` if desired.

2. Represent a group via two data structures. A list of group members of type [AccountList](https://github.com/NearSocial/standards/blob/main/types/common/AccountList.md), and a new object standard `Group`, which consists of the following required fields: 

- a unique identifier: String (randomly generated unique ID i.e. [generateUID()](https://near.org/near/widget/ComponentDetailsPage?src=devs.near/widget/group.create&tab=source)) 
- gateway: String (the gateway where the group was initially created)
- metadata: [Metadata](https://github.com/NearSocial/standards/blob/main/types/common/Metadata.md?plain=1)

	Seperating Group data into distinct objects, `grupos.near/post/index/[groupUID]_members`and `grupos.near/post/index/[groupUID]_data`, affords using socialDB's namespace permissions to restrict write-access of a Group's metadata to specific users, i.e. groups admins or the creator of the group, while allowing all group members to write to the list of members.

	The `[groupUID]_members` AccountList serves as a convenient socialDB reference to the list of users which should have access to a group. The actual restricion of write-access to a group's namespace will be enforced by leveraging near.social's `grant_write_permissions`.

3. With the above we can agree to use the namespace @ `grupos.near/post/index` to contain groups:

{
    "alice.near": {...},
    "mob.near": {...},
    "grupos.near":
    {
        "post":
        {
            "index":
            {
                "1290387aslkdjf09182_members":
                {
                    "alice.near": "",
					"bob.near": "",
                },
                "1290387aslkdjf09182_data":
                {
                    "name": "zksync fans",
                    "gateway": "near.org",
                    "metadata":
                    {
                        "description": "we love zksync",
                        "tags": ["ether-js", "eth", "multichain"]
                    }
                },
                "00110357asiedjf0935t_members":
                {
                    "gauthamravi.near": "",
                    "mob.near": "",
                    "root.near": ""
                },
                 "00110357asiedjf0935t_data":
                {
                    "name": "the best group",
                    "gateway": "near.social",
                    "metadata":
                    {
                        "description": "super group",
                        "guidelines": "be excellent humans."
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

### Supporting this requires: 

1. A common goods provider to maintain a service that abstracts and securely exposes calls to social.near's `grant_write_access` and `set` methods via an API such as
	/groups/[groupUID]/add/[accountId]  (adds a user to a group and creates the group if it doesn't exist)
	/groups/[groupUID]/remove/[accountId] 
	/groups/[groupUID]/verify?accountIds=[accountIds] (a convenience method to expose the canonical source of truth of group membership. Returns an object of [accountId]:boolean pairs to confirm which accountIds have write access fo the `_members` scope of the given groupUID. This API essentially wraps calls to `is_write_permission_granted`, modified to accept multiple AccountIds.)
2. A common goods provider to maintain an indexer and service to fan-out group notifications into notifications sent to each group's member.



## Drawbacks

- By granting each group member write access to `grupos.near/post/index/[groupUID]_members`, any group member could leverage near.social's `set` to remove others from the list of group members. However, this is of minimal impact since this list is independent of the management of write permissions. In this case, this means that a removed group member would retain their ablity to write the list of members. Easily supporting data recovery from a previous block.  

- ...


## Prototype
//TBD


## Related Discussions
1. [Request for Comment](https://near.social/devgovgigs.near/widget/gigs-board.pages.Post?id=1042)
2. [Technical Discussion](https://github.com/near/near-discovery/discussions/342)
3. [Ideation with Example Components](https://near.org/devgovgigs.near/widget/gigs-board.pages.Post?id=1083)


## Alternatives
1. Adjacent to root level socialDB accounts, introduce a new top level object called `groups`.  

Where each group object contains the following required fields: 

- a unique identifier: String
- originating gateway: String
- members: [AccountList](https://github.com/NearSocial/standards/blob/main/types/common/AccountList.md)
- metadata: [Metadata](https://github.com/NearSocial/standards/blob/main/types/common/Metadata.md?plain=1)

`{
	"alice.near": {...},
	"mob.near": {...},
	"groups" : [
		{
			"1290387aslkdjf09182": {
				"gateway": "near.org",
				"members": {
					"alice.near": "",
					"bob.near": "",
				},
				metadata: {
				"name": "zksync fans"
					...
				},
			}
		},
		{
			"00110357asiedjf0935t": {
				"gateway": "near.social",
				"members": {
					"gauthamravi.near": "",
					"mob.near": "",
					"root.near": "",
				},
				metadata: {
					"name": "thebestgroup", 
					...
				},

			}
		}
		...
	]
}`

This alternative is suboptimal because 
- It breaks the socialDB pattern of top level objects being Accounts
- Restricting non-group members from writing to a group's namespace would require an extension of socialdB's permissions management; increasing its complexity. 
- It would require more implementation time and cross-ecosystem coordination.



# Potential Impact and Dependencies
//TBD
Here we aim to be mindful of our environment and generate empathy towards others who may be impacted by our decisions.

- *What other systems or teams are affected by this proposal?*
- *How could this be exploited by malicious attackers?*


# Unresolved questions

- How might a group owner/admin or member deal with malicous group members?



**Checklist:**

- [X]  Share as WIP with folks you trust, to gut-check
- [X]  Publish to the dedicated github space
- [ ]  Build a prototype that demonstrates the implications on all related features (notifications, posts, etc)
- [ ]  Assign reviewers (take a look at previous SEPs for suggestions)


**Recommendations**

- If there are areas that you're not convinced on, tag people who you consider may know about this and ask for their input.
- If you have doubts, ask in the Telegram NearSocial group for help moving something forward.
- The success of the implementation of your proposal depends on how the prototype demonstrates end-to-end considerations, and consensus decisions of the maintainers of github.com/nearsocial/standards. 
